>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JANUARY 29:
JUDGES HALT PRESIDENT TRUMP'S
ORDER BANNING REFUGEES AND
MIGRANTS FROM SEVEN MAJORITY-
MUSLIM NATIONS, WHILE PROTESTORS
OF THE BAN TAKE TO THE STREETS.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS
DEFENDING ITS CONTROVERSIAL
EXECUTIVE ORDER BLOCKING
IMMIGRANTS AND REFUGEES FROM
SELECT MUSLIM COUNTRIES FROM
ENTERING THE U.S.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS SINCE THE
PRESIDENT IMPOSED THE 90-DAY BAN
ON FRIDAY, A TOTAL OF 325,000
TRAVELERS FROM ABROAD ARRIVED
IN THE UNITED STATES YESTERDAY,
AND ONLY 109 WERE DETAINED AT
AIRPORTS FOR QUESTIONING,
BECAUSE THEY'RE CITIZENS OF
THE BANNED COUNTRIES.
THOSE MAJORITY-MUSLIM COUNTRIES
ARE IRAN, IRAQ, LIBYA, SYRIA,
SOMALIA, SUDAN, AND YEMEN, WHICH
HAVE A COMBINED POPULATION OF
219 MILLION PEOPLE.
TRUMP CHIEF OF STAFF REINCE
PRIEBUS SAID TODAY MOST OF THE
DETAINED TRAVELERS WERE
RELEASED, THOUGH "A COUPLE
DOZEN" REMAINED IN CUSTODY.
>> MY SUSPICION IS THOSE PEOPLE
WILL MOVE ON ALONG AS LONG AS
THEY'RE NOT DANGEROUS, AND
PERHAPS A COUPLE OF THEM WILL BE
FURTHER DETAINED, BECAUSE IT'S
DETERMINED THAT THEY'RE
DANGEROUS FOR THIS COUNTRY, SO
THIS WAS A PROMISE THAT
PRESIDENT TRUMP HAD MADE AND
IT'S A PROMISE HE'S GOING TO
KEEP AND HE'S NOT WILLING TO BE
WRONG ON THIS SUBJECT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN AN APPARENT
REVERSAL ON ONE KEY POINT,
PRIEBUS SAID LEGAL PERMANENT
RESIDENTS OF THE U.S., GREEN
CARD HOLDERS, ARE EXEMPT FROM
THE BAN.
WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN
SEAN SPICER SAID THE ORDER HAD
BEEN IN THE WORKS FOR WEEKS, AND
THE ELEMENT OF SURPRISE IN
ISSUING IT WAS INTENTIONAL.
>> WHAT WE COULDN'T DO WAS
TELEGRAPH OUR POSITION AHEAD OF
TIME TO ENSURE THAT PEOPLE
FLOODED IN BEFORE THAT HAPPENED,
BEFORE IT WENT INTO PLACE.
>> Sreenivasan: BOTH SPICER AND
PRIEBUS SAID THE EXECUTIVE ORDER
IS NOT A MUSLIM BAN, AND POINTED
OUT THERE'S NO BAN ON TRAVELERS
FROM 46 OTHER MUSLIM-MAJORITY
COUNTRIES.
SENATE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL SAID
TODAY HE OPPOSES ANY RELIGIOUS
TEST FOR ENTERING THE U.S.
>> TO THE EXTENT THAT THEY ARE
TRYING TO IMPROVE THE VETTING
PROCESS, I THINK THAT'S IN
ORDER.
WE NEED TO BEAR IN MIND THAT WE
DON'T HAVE RELIGIOUS TESTS IN
THIS COUNTRY AND WE ALSO NEED TO
REMEMBER THAT SOME OF OUR BEST
ALLIES IN THE WAR ON ISLAMIC
TERRORISM ARE MUSLIMS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
DEFENDED HIS ORDER IN A TWITTER
MESSAGE POSTED THIS MORNING,
SAYING, "OUR COUNTRY NEEDS
STRONG BORDERS AND EXTREME
VETTING, NOW.
LOOK WHAT IS HAPPENING ALL OVER
EUROPE AND, INDEED, THE WORLD--
A HORRIBLE MESS!"
FEDERAL JUDGES IN AT LEAST FOUR
STATES-- NEW YORK, VIRGINIA,
MASSACHUSETTS, AND WASHINGTON
STATE-- HAVE ISSUED STAYS OF THE
ORDER TO BLOCK ITS ENFORCEMENT.
THE FIRST CAME FROM U.S.
DISTRICT JUDGE ANN DONNELLY IN
NEW YORK, ORDERING AUTHORITIES
TO REFRAIN FROM DEPORTING
PREVIOUSLY APPROVED REFUGEES
FROM THE BANNED COUNTRIES.
HER RULING STEMMED FROM A
LAWSUIT BROUGHT BY THE A.C.L.U.
ON BEHALF OF TWO IRAQI MEN
DETAINED AT KENNEDY AIRPORT
YESTERDAY AND LATER RELEASED.
IN A SEEMINGLY CONTRADICTORY
STATEMENT, THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY SAID IT WILL
COMPLY WITH ALL JUDICIAL ORDERS
BUT ALSO ASSERTED:
"PRESIDENT TRUMP'S EXECUTIVE
ORDERS REMAIN IN PLACE--
PROHIBITED TRAVEL WILL REMAIN
PROHIBITED, AND THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT RETAINS ITS RIGHT TO
REVOKE VISAS AT ANY TIME IF
REQUIRED FOR NATIONAL SECURITY
OR PUBLIC SAFETY."
PROTESTS AGAINST PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S TRAVEL BAN CONTINUED
INTO A SECOND DAY TODAY IN
CITIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
PARTICULARLY AT AIRPORTS WHERE
TRAVELERS WERE AT RISK OF BEING
DETAINED, AND IN OTHER QUARTERS
AS WELL.
THOUSANDS RALLIED THIS
AFTERNOON IN THE NATION'S
CAPITAL TO PROTEST THE
PRESIDENT'S NEW POLICY NEAR THE
WHITE HOUSE.
AND A HUGE THRONG OF PROTESTERS
FILLED BOSTON'S COPLEY SQUARE
TODAY.
IN NEW YORK, PROTESTERS GATHERED
IN BATTERY PARK AT THE SOUTHERN
TIP OF MANHATTAN, WITHIN SIGHT
OF THE STATUE OF LIBERTY.
LAST NIGHT, A LARGE CROWD OF
PROTESTERS KEPT VIGIL OUTSIDE
THE CITY'S JOHN F. KENNEDY
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT WHERE A
DOZEN REFUGEES HAD BEEN DETAINED
TRYING TO ENTER THE COUNTRY.
IN NEW YORK, AN EMOTIONAL SENATE
MINORITY LEADER CHUCK SCHUMER
DEMANDED THE EXECUTIVE ORDER BE
RESCINDED.
>> THIS EXECUTIVE ORDER WAS
MEAN-SPIRITED AND UNAMERICAN.
>> Sreenivasan: ELSEWHERE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY, A HUGE PROTEST AT
SEATTLE-TACOMA INTERNATIONAL
AIRPORT TURNED VIOLENT LAST
NIGHT, WHEN POLICE SPRAYED TEAR
GAS TO DISPERSE PROTESTERS FROM
THE TERMINAL.
AT THE ATLANTA AIRPORT,
DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSMAN AND CIVIL
RIGHTS ICON JOHN LEWIS WAS AMONG
THE PROTESTERS.
THERE WERE ALSO LARGE CROWDS OF
PROTESTORS AT CHICAGO'S O'HARE
AIRPORT, DALLAS-FORT WORTH
AIRPORT, AND DULLES
INTERNATIONAL OUTSIDE
WASHINGTON, D.C.
TODAY, MINNESOTA DEMOCRAT KEITH
ELLISON, ONE OF ONLY TWO MUSLIMS
IN CONGRESS, SAID MISTER TRUMP'S
ORDER IS TANTAMOUNT TO A BAN ON
MUSLIMS ENTERING THE U.S.
>> WHEN YOU WANT TO BAN
REFUGEES, THESE FOLKS GO THROUGH
AN 18-24 MONTH VETTING AS IT IS.
YOU KNOW, THE FACT IS, IS THAT
IF YOU TALK ABOUT BANNING
SYRIANS, ABOUT THREE QUARTERS OF
THOSE FOLKS ARE WOMEN AND
CHILDREN.
A FULL THIRD OF THEM ARE KIDS
UNDER 12 YEARS OLD.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST YEAR'S
DEMOCRATIC NOMINEE FOR VICE
PRESIDENT, VIRGINIA SENATOR TIM
KAINE, SAID THE POLICY HURTS THE
COUNTRY.
>> THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS
POISED TO DO HORRIBLE DANGER TO
OUR COUNTRY OUR VALUES, OUR
PEOPLE AND OUR REPUTATION.
>> Reporter: THE EXECUTIVE ORDER
HAS ALSO COME UNDER FIRE BY SOME
REPUBLICAN SENATORS AND
CONGRESSMEN, WHO CALL IT AN
OVERREACH OR TOO BROAD.
ARIZONA SENATOR JEFF FLAKE SAID:
AMERICAN BUSINESS LEADERS IN
SILICON VALLEY, WHO RELY HEAVILY
ON FOREIGN ENGINEERS AND
EXPERTS, OPPOSE THE ORDER.
APPLE C.E.O. TIM COOK TOLD STAFF
IN AN E-MAIL, "APPLE WOULD NOT
EXIST WITHOUT IMMIGRATION, LET
ALONE THRIVE AND INNOVATE THE
WAY WE DO."
GOOGLE CO-FOUNDER AND RUSSIAN
IMMIGRANT SERGEY BRIN WAS
SPOTTED AMONG THE PROTESTERS AT
THE SAN FRANCISCO AIRPORT.
IN EUROPE TODAY, BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER THERESA SHIFTED HER
TONE TO SAY SHE DOES NOT AGREE
WITH THE ORDER.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SAID THE FIGHT AGAINST TERRORISM
IS NO EXCUSE FOR A BAN ON
REFUGEES.
BUT FAR-RIGHT LEADERS IN
GERMANY, ITALY, AND THE
NETHERLANDS APPLAUDED THE BAN.
THE 22-MEMBER ARAB LEAGUE SAID
IT'S "DEEPLY CONCERNED" ABOUT
THE BAN AND CALLED IT
"UNJUSTIFIED."
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ON THE
LEGAL AND IMMIGRATION ISSUES
RELATED TO PRESIDENT TRUMP'S
EXECUTIVE ORDER, I AM JOINED
FROM MIAMI BY "USA TODAY"
REPORTER ALAN GOMEZ.
ALAN, HOW DO WE GET TO THESE
LAST 24 HOURS, WHAT SEEMS
CONFUSING AN CHAOTIC AND HOW
THIS POLICY HAS BEEN
IMPLEMENTED?
>> I THINK ONE OF THE BIGGEST
PROBLEMS IS THAT PRESIDENT TRUMP
SIGNED THE ORDER, BUT THERE
APPEARS TO BE VERY LITTLE
GUIDANCE WHEN IT COMES TO HOW
IT'S BEING IMPLEMENTED ON THE
GROUND.
SO WE'RE HEARING DIFFERENT
REPORTS HOW CUSTOM AND BORDER
PROTECTION IS TREATING PEOPLE
COMING TOO THE COUNTRY AT LET'S
SAY BOSTON AND WASHINGTON DULLES
THAN THEY ARE IN LOS ANGELES AND
SAN FRANCISCO.
SO RIGHT NOW WE'RE HEARING THAT
THERE ARE STILL PEOPLE DETAINED
IN LOS ANGELES AND SAN
FRANCISCO.
ON THE EAST COAST A LOT OF THOSE
CASES HAVE LARGELY BEEN RESOLVED
BECAUSE OF A COUPLE OF COURT
ORDERS BUT IT IS MAKING FOR A
DIFFICULT SITUATION AS LAWYERS
ARE TRYING TO JUST GET ACCESS TO
THESE PEOPLE BEING DETAINED AND
FACING THESE CONFLICTING ORDERS
FROM CUSTOMS AND BORDER
PROTECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY IS THERE
CONFUSION WHEN IT COMES TO
COSTUME, BORDER PROTECTION, THE
TSA AND AIRLINES.
USUALLY IN THE PAST IT HAS BEEN
A SIX MONTH WARNING SIGN, YOU
HAVE TO START USING YOUR
PASSPORTS TO GO TO CANADA AND
BACK, WHATEVER THIS CAME MUCH
QUICKER.
>> BECAUSE OF THE WAY THE ORDER
WAS SIGNED AND THEN JUST
IMMEDIATELY IMPLEMENTED.
THERE WAS VERY, VERY LITTLE TIME
FOR CUSTOMS AND BORDER
PROTECTION TO RESPOND TO THIS.
THEY SAY THAT AS SOON AS THE
ORDER WAS SIGNED THEY
IMMEDIATELY ISSUED NEW GUIDANCE
TO THEIR PORT OFFICERS, THE
PEOPLE THAT YOU INTERVIEW WITH
WHEN YOU COME INTO THE COUNTRY
AND UPDATED THEIR COMPUTER
SYSTEM SO THAT THEY WOULD
SPECIFICALLY TARGET PEOPLE FROM
THESE SEVEN COUNTRIES THAT WERE
LISTED IN THE BAN.
BUT AS YOU COULD IMAGINE, WHEN
THAT GOES OUT THAT QUICKLY TO
THAT MANY OFFICERS WITHOUT ANY
SORT OF TRAINING OR WITHOUT ANY
SORT OF MORE SYSTEMIC CHANGES TO
THE SYSTEM, IT IT CREATES A LOT
OF CONFUSION.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE NOTION OF THE
RELIGIOUS TEST THAT SEEMS TO BE
BAKED INTO THIS ACTION?
>> WE HAVEN'T EVEN STARTED
GETTING INTO THE LEGAL DEBATE
OVER THE OVERALL LEGALITY OF
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S ORDER.
AND THAT'S WHEN WE'RE GOING TO
START SEEING WHETHER-- WEATHER
COURTS DECIDE THAT THIS WAS THE
QUOTE UNQUOTE MUSLIM BAN THAT HE
TALKED ABOUT ON THE CAMPAIGN
TRAIL OR IF THIS WAS REALLY A
NATIONAL SECURITY ORDER THAT HE
ISSUED.
THERE IS, YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU
LOOK THROUGH THE ORDER, MOST OF
IT IS IS TIED TO NATIONAL
SECURITY.
IT OPENS UP, TALKING ABOUT THE
TERRORIST ATTACKS OF SEPTEMBER
11th.
THE PRESIDENT GOES ON TO EXPLAIN
IN GREAT DETAIL WHY THIS IS
BEING DONE ON NATIONAL SECURITY
GROUNDS.
BUT BECAUSE OF HIS PAST
STATEMENTS ABOUT THE MUSLIM BAN,
AN BECAUSE OF AT LEAST ONE
PROVISION IN THE ORDER THAT
SEEMS TO INDICATE THAT WE ARE
GOING TO GIVE PRIVATIZATION
TO PEOPLE WHO ARE RELIGIOUSLY
PERSECUTED IN SOME OF THESE
COUNTRIES, IT COULD OPEN UP THE
ENTIRE ORDER TO LEGAL QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHETHER THIS IS REALLY A
RELIGIOUS BAN OR IF IT IT IS
BASED SOLELY ON NATIONAL SCOOTER
GROUNDS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES THIS
DO TO THE TIME LINE OF ANYBODY
THAT IS IN LINE FOR A VISA
INTERVIEW OR AN ABILITY TO ENTER
THE U.S.?
>> IF YOU ARE FROM THOSE SEVEN
COUNTRIES OR YOU'RE TRYING TO
APPLY THROUGH THE REFUGEE
PROGRAM, I THINK RIGHT NOW
YOU'RE JUST ON INDEFINITE HOLD.
AGAIN, THESE RULINGS THAT WE'VE
SEEN OVER THE WEEKEND ONLY DEAL
WITH THE PEOPLE WHO ARE ALREADY
HERE AND WERE ALREADY ON THE
WAY.
BUT PEOPLE WHO ARE APPLYING FOR
VISAS FROM ANY OF THOSE SEVEN
COUNTRIES OR TRYING TO ATTAIN
REFUGEE STATUS, RIGHT NOW THAT
ENTIRE PROGRAM IS EFFECTIVELY
SHUT DOWN.
THEY CANNOT APPLY, THEY CANNOT
GO THROUGH THE INTERVIEW
PROCESS.
WE ARE HEARING STORIES AROUND
THE WORLD RIGHT NOW OF PEOPLE
WHO HAD THEIR INTERVIEWED
SCHEDULED AND NOW THEY ARE TOLD
HEY, THAT'S ON HOLD RIGHT NOW.
THERE'S JUST CONFUSION AROUND
THE WORLD RIGHT NOW OVER THIS AS
THEY TRY TO SORT OUT WHAT IT
REALLY MEANS.
>> ALAN GOMEZ, JOINING US FROM
MIAMI TODAY, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE UNITED
STATES ADMITTED 12,500 SYRIAN
REFUGEES LAST YEAR, BUT THE
TRUMP ORDER BANS ANY MORE FROM
COMING INDEFINITELY WHILE THE
VETTING PROCESS IS REVIEWED.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S MEGAN
THOMPSON REPORTS THE POLICY
LEAVES PEOPLE HERE VERY
CONCERNED.
>> IT'S LIKE A HELL FIRE.
>> MOHAMMED HAMID WORKED AS AN
INTERPRETER IN IRAQ FOR TEN
YEARS.
SOON AFTER HE STARTED HIS JOB,
HE SAYS, HE BECAME THE TARGET
OF IRAQI MILITIAS, FOR HELPING
THE AMERICANS.
>> MOST OF THE PEOPLE WHO
WORKED FOR THE AMERICANS,
ESPECIALLY INTERPRETERS LIKE ME,
THEIR LIFE WAS IN REAL RISK.
MY FAMILY WONDER WHY I DIDN'T GO
OUTSIDE THAT MUCH, BECAUSE ANY
PERSON COULD RECOGNIZE ME.
EVEN DURING LATE HOURS AT NIGHT
IT REALLY WAS TERRIBLE TO LIVE
IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES AND
CONDITIONS.
YOU ARE LIKE UNDER THREAT.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS IN 2007
IRAQI MILITIAMEN BROKE INTO HIS
HOME.
HE WASN'T THERE, BUT, HE SAYS,
HIS BROTHER, WHO LOOKS JUST LIKE
HIM, WAS KIDNAPPED AND TORTURED.
>> THEY KIDNAP HIM FOR SEVERAL
DAYS, AND HE WAS BAD TORTURED,
AND WHEN THEY FIGURE IT WAS NOT
ME, THEY LET HIM GO, BUT HE WAS
ALMOST DEAD.
>> Reporter: THAT'S WHEN HAMEED
APPLIED FOR A VISA TO LEAVE IRAQ
FOR THE U.S., AND TO BRING HIS
WIFE AND THEIR SON, NOW TEN, AND
THEIR DAUGHTER, WHO'S FOUR.
THE VETTING PROCESS TOOK THREE
YEARS.
TODAY, HAMEED APPEARED AT A
PRESS CONFERENCE WITH NEW YORK
SENATOR CHUCK SCHUMER, WHO
CALLED THE TRUMP EXECUTIVE
ORDER"
MISGUIDED" AND "SHOCKING."
HAMEED'S FAMILY ARRIVED HERE
JUST IN TIME-- ON JANUARY 5th,
THREE WEEKS BEFORE THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IMPOSED THE NEW
BAN ON MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES
FROM IRAQ AND SIX OTHER
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM COUNTRIES.
>> WHEN I WAS IN BAGHDAD, I
DIDN'T KNOW WHEN I WOULD BE
KILLED, ME, MY KIDS, NOW THAT
>> Reporter: HAMEED'S FAMILY HAS
SETTLED IN BAYONNE, NEW JERSEY,
ABOUT AN HOUR'S COMMUTE TO NEW
YORK CITY.
HE'S LOOKING FOR WORK AS A
COMPUTER CONSULTANT.
>> I AM A GOOD CITIZEN, I HAVE
MY OWN BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: AZZAM ELIAS WAS
ALSO AT TODAY'S PRESS
CONFERENCE.
HE IMMIGRATED TO THE U.S. FROM
SYRIA IN 1978 AS A REFUGEE,
FLEEING VIOLENCE AND
PERSECUTION.
HIS TWO DAUGHTERS REMAINED
BEHIND, RAISED BY THEIR MOTHER.
WHEN THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR BEGAN
SIX YEARS AGO, HE SAYS HE KNEW
WHAT HE HAD TO DO.
>> I SAYS, WE HAVE TO BRING HIM
HERE.
WE HAVE TO.
WE HAVE TO SAVE MY
GRANDCHILDREN.
>> Reporter: RANIA, NOW 37, SAYS
THE HARDEST PART OF LIVING IN
SYRIA WAS THE CONSTANT SHELLING
AND NOT KNOWING IF HER KIDS
WOULD MAKE IT HOME FROM SCHOOL.
ONE DAY A SUICIDE BOMBER BLEW
HIMSELF UP RIGHT OUTSIDE THEIR
APARTMENT IN DAMASCUS.
AFTER YEARS OF APPLICATIONS, SHE
FINALLY GOT A VISA WITH THE HELP
OF THE NONPROFIT CATHOLIC
CHARITIES.
SHE AND HER HUSBAND AND THEIR
FOUR KIDS ARRIVED IN NEW YORK
JUST LAST MONTH.
WHAT DOES IT FEEL LIKE TO BE IN
RANIA TELL ME-- SHE DOESN'T HAVE
TO WORRY ANYMORE THAT SOMEBODY
IS GOING TO HURT HER KIDS, AND
SHE FINALLY FEELS AT PEACE.
BUT RANIA'S SISTER, AZZAM'S
OTHER DAUGHTER, REMAINS A
REFUGEE IN LEBANON, NEXT DOOR TO
SYRIA.
THE FATE OF HER APPLICATION FOR
A U.S. VISA MORE UNCERTAIN THAN
BEFORE.
>> IT'S SO TERRIBLE.
THESE KIDS ARE HERE, HOW HAPPY
AND PEACEFUL HERE, YOU CAN SEE
ON THEIR FACES, BUT THE OTHER
ONES, YOU LEFT US BEHIND.
OR YOU DON'T WANT US.
THAT'S THE FEELING I FEEL.
I CAN'T SLEEP, I CAN'T EAT, I
CAN'T WORK.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO.
>> Reporter: ELIAS, WHO LIVES IN
THE BRONX AND OWNS HIS OWN
UPHOLSTERY BUSINESS, SAYS HE
WANTS THE PRESIDENT TO KNOW THE
AND HIS FAMILY ARE GOOD PEOPLE.
>> THIS IS NOT A FACE OF A
TERRORIST.
THIS IS THE FACE THAT'S GOING TO
MAKE AMERICA GREAT.
>>READ ABOUT HOW PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S IMMIGRATION ORDER
AFFECTS STUDENTS AND PROFESSORS
AT UNIVERSITIES.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TO HELP US
UNDERSTAND THE STAYS OF THE
TRUMP EXECUTIVE ORDER ISSUED BY
FEDERAL JUDGES, I AM JOINED HERE
IN THE STUDIO BY ANTHONY ROMERO,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION.
THE ACLU ARGUED SUCCESSFULLY FOR
THE STAY IN BROOKLYN FEDERAL
COURT LAST NIGHT.
WHAT ARE THE MULTIPLE
CENTRAL CHALLENGES THAT YOU HAVE
TO THE EXECUTIVE ORDER?
>> THERE ARE A NUMBER.
FOR US THE EXECUTIVE ORDER
REALLY DOES BREAK DOWN INTO FOUR
PARTS.
FIRST, IT PUTS A MORATORIUM ON
ALL REFUGEES COMING TO THIS
COUNTRY FOR 1250 DAYS, IT TELLS
THE NUMBER OF SYRIAN REFUGEES
WHO CAN BE RESETTLED HERE.
THIRD COMPONENT, LOOKING AT A
BAN FOR 90 DAYS OR MORE OF
INDIVIDUALS COMING FROM SEVEN
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM COUNTRIES.
AND FOURTH, AND PROBABLY MOST
NOTABLY CARVES OUT EXCEPTIONS
FOR RELIGIOUS MINORITIES FROM
THOSE SEVEN COUNTRIES.
SO TAKEN TOGETHER WE THINK THAT
THOSE FOUR ASPECTS OF THE
EXECUTIVE ORDER VIOLATE DUE
PROCESS, RIGHTS, EQUAL
PROTECTION RIGHTS.
THE FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS OF9
INDIVIDUALS VIS A VIS THE
GOVERNMENT.
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT SUPPOSED
TO EITHER FAVOR OR DISCRIMINATE
AGAINST ANY RELIGION.
VIOLATIONS OF DOMESTIC STATUTES,
THE IMMIGRATION NATIONALITY ACT,
THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
ACT.
WE THINK IT EVEN IMPLICATES SOME
INTERNATIONAL TREATIES INCLUDING
THE CONVENTION AGAINST TORTURE
AND REFUGEES.
>> PEOPLE ARE SAYING LISTEN, THE
WORD MUSLIM, ISLAM, CHRISTIANITY
AREN'T IN THIS EXECUTIVE ORDER.
IS IT FAIR TO CALL IT IT A
MUSLIM BAN?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
IT'S CRYSTAL CLEAR.
THE SEVEN COUNTRIES THEY PICKED,
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM COUNTRIES.
THE CARVING OUT FOR MINORITY
RELIGIONS WHERE PRESIDENT TRUMP
CONTEMPORANEOUSLY SIGNED THE
ORDER TALKED ON CHRISTIAN
BROADCAST RADIO.
THE FACT THAT HE WANTED TO
PROTECT CHRISTIANS.
IT'S CLEARLY A MUSLIM BAN.
IT'S CLEARLY MEANT TO TARGET
CERTAIN MUSLIM COUNTRIES.
IT DOESN'T GO AFTER THE SAUDIS.
IT DOESN'T GO AFTER OTHER GULF
ARAB COUNTRIES.
AND YET IT'S CLEAR THAT THIS IS
MAKING GOOD ON DONALD TRUMP'S
PROMISE TO TARGET AND TO BAN
MUSLIMS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THAT'S
PART OF THE ADMINISTRATION'S
CLAIM, TO SAY LISTEN, WE DIDN'T
GO AFTER ALMOST MUSLIM
COUNTRIES, THERE ARE OTHER
COUNTRIES THAT ARE ON THIS LIST
HOW SO HOW YOU CAN SAY WE ARE
DISCRIMINATING.
>> THESE SEVEN HAVE LARGE MUSLIM
POPULATIONS.
THE COUNTRIES NOT ON THE LIST,
THAT IS A QUESTION BETTER PUT TO
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION.
WHY NOT THE SAUDIS, FOR
INSTANCE, MOST OF THE 9/11
ATTACKERS WERE OF SAUDI DESCENT
OR SAUDI ORIGIN.
>> TELL ME ABOUT HOW THIS IS
GOING TO RECONCILE?
WE'VE GOT A DECISION IN
BROOKLYN.
WE'VE GOT A DECISION IN BOSTON.
MAYBE ANOTHER ONE IN
ARLINGTON, OR VIRGINIA.
SO WHAT HAPPENS?
BASICALLY IS THERE A
RECONCILIATION PROCESS.
DOES THIS HAVE TO GET APPEAL TO
GO TO THE SUPREME COURT?
>> THERE IS ALSO FROM WHAT I
UNDERSTAND CASES IN SEATTLE
WASHINGTON AS OF THIS MORNING.
THE CASE IN BROOKLYN, THE ONE WE
FILED ON LATE LAST NIGHT AND
EARLY YESTERDAY MORNING AND THE
JUDGE RULED LATE LAST NIGHT IS A
CLASS ACTION SUIT IT COVERS ALL
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE BANNED ENTRY
INTO THIS COUNTRY BECAUSE OF THE
TRUMP EXECUTIVE ORDER.
SO WE THINK THAT WILL BE THE
PRIMARY VEHICLE BY WHICH THE
COURTS ADJUDICATE THE
CONSTITUTIONALITY, THE LEGALITY
OF THE EXECUTIVE ORDER.
THEY ULTIMATELY MAY BE
CONSOLIDATED.
DEPENDS ON WHICH, HOW FAR, WHICH
JUDGE GETS OUT IN FRONT.
THAT ALL WILL BE DETERMINED IN
THE COURSE OF THE NEXT SEVERAL
WEEKS.
>> AND WHAT HAPPENS TO THE
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE THAT
PRESIDENT TRUMP WILL HAVE AN
ABILITY TO NOMINATE THIS WEEK?
COULD THAT BE THE TIE-BREAKING
VOTE IF THIS HAS TO GO TO THE
SUPREME COURT.
>> COULD PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE.
WE ARE A LONG WAY AWAY FROM THE
SUPREME COURT.
OBVIOUSLY FROM THE LEVEL T COULD
APPEAL TO THE COURT OF APPEALS
IT IS THE TYPE OF CASE THAT
WOULD ULTIMATELY COME BEFORE THE
SUPREME COURT.
I'M HOPEFUL.
I THINK THAT EVEN WITH
CONSERVATIVE MAJORITY OF THE
SUPREME COURT, MANY OF THE
JUSTICE WAS DON'T OFTEN VOTE
WITH US ON RACIAL JUSTICE CASES
WILL VOTE WITH US ON FIRST
AMENDMENT CASES.
>> Sreenivasan: ANTHONY
ROMERO, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PENTAGON
CONFIRMS AN AMERICAN SOLDIER WAS
KILLED TODAY DURING A COMMANDO
RAID ON AL QAEDA'S BRANCH IN
YEMEN.
U.S. MILITARY OFFICIALS SAY
PRESIDENT TRUMP APPROVED THE
PRE-DAWN ATTACK, WHICH, THEY
SAY, KILLED 14 MILITANTS, IN THE
CENTRAL YEMENI PROVINCE OF AL-
BAYDA.
THE DEATH OF THE U.S. COMMANDO
IS THE FIRST KNOWN AMERICAN
COMBAT FATALITY UNDER THE NEW
ADMINISTRATION.
AL QAEDA SAID YEMENI WOMEN AND
CHILDREN ALSO DIED IN THE RAID,
INCLUDING THE EIGHT-YEAR-OLD
DAUGHTER OF ANWAR AL-AWLAKI, THE
RADICAL YEMENI-AMERICAN CLERIC
KILLED BY A U.S. DRONE STRIKE IN
YEMEN SIX YEARS AGO.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS GIVING HIS
CHIEF POLITICAL STRATEGIST A
SEAT ON THE NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL.
STEVE BANNON'S APPOINTMENT IS
PART OF AN N.S.C. SHAKEUP THAT
REDUCES THE ROLE OF THE
MILITARY'S JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
AND THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE.
THEIR ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS OF
THE N.S.C. PRINCIPALS COMMITTEE
WILL NOW BE OPTIONAL, ACCORDING
TO THE TRUMP EXECUTIVE ORDER
ISSUED YESTERDAY.
TODAY, ARIZONA SENATOR JOHN
McCAIN CALLED THE ELEVATION OF
BANNON, A ONE-TIME NAVY OFFICER,
RADICAL AND SAID HE WAS
CONCERNED ABOUT A DIMINISHED
ROLE FOR THE JOINT CHIEFS.
JEFF GREENFIELD HERE TO DISCUSS
THE POLITICAL FALLOUT OF THE
TRUMP EXECUTIVE ORDER AND OTHER
ACTIONS HE HAS TAKEN IN THE
FIRST TEN DAYS IN OFFICE.
JEFF, LET'S SEPARATE OUT LEGAL
ISSUES FROM THE POLITICAL ONES.
WHAT-- HOW SIGNIFICANT OF A
POLITICAL WEEK HAS THIS BEEN?
>> YEAH, YOU'RE QUITE RIGHT
ABOUT THAT, LEGALLY SOME PEOPLE
HAVE ARGUED THAT THE PRESIDENT
HAS VERY WIDE LATITUDE TO
DETERMINE WHO DOES AND WHO DOES
NOT GAIN ENTRY TO THE UNITED
STATES.
JONATHAN TURLY AT GEORGE
WASHINGTON SAYS HE DOESN'T LIKE
THIS PLAN AT ALL.
HE SAYS IT MIGHT BE LEGAL.
OTHERS SAID IT VIOLATES THE 1965
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
WHATEVER THE LEGALITIES,
POLITICALLY, IT'S A DIFFERENT
STORY.
BUT ONE THAT I THINK REQUIRES
SOME SUBTLE DISTINCTIONS.
CLEARLY THE IMAGE OF SYRIAN
CHRISTIANS BEING THROWN BACK ON
A PLANE AND BEING DEPORTED OUT
OF THE COUNTRY, A CONTRACTOR
FROM IRAQ WHO RISKED HIS LIFE TO
HELP THE UNITED STATES MILITARY
BEING PUT IN HANDCUFFS.
THAT IS NOT THE MESSAGE THE
WHITE HOUSE WANTED NOR DOES IT
LIKE THE FACT THAT A FAIR NUMBER
OF REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS,
NATIONAL SECURITY EXPERTS WHO
SERVED IN BOTH REPUBLICAN AND
DEMOCRATIC ADMINISTRATIONS ARE
SAYING THIS IS ALMOST A
RECRUITING MESSAGE FOR ISIS.
LIKE THE ABU GHRAIB PRISON
SCANDAL.
BUT I THINK THE OTHER PART OF
THIS IS THAT TO TRUMP'S CORE
SUPPORTERS WHAT THIS SIGNALS IS
WE ARE GOING TO DO WHAT WE
PROMISED YOU WE WERE GOING TO
DO.
WE'RE GOING TO CRACK DOWN VERY
HARD ON ALL KINDS OF PEOPLE
SEEKING TO COME INTO THIS
COUNTRY.
WE WANT TO PROTECT YOU EVEN IF
IT MEANS BARRING A STUDENT FROM
COMING HOME OR SEPARATING
FAMILIES.
SO I THINK WHEN YOU ASK THE
POLITICS OF IT, IT IS THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT THE
TRADITIONAL POLITICAL
ESTABLISHMENT, IF YOU WILL, IS
HEARING AND WHAT TRUMP
SUPPORTERS ARE HEARING.
>> THEY HAVE A DEPARTURE FROM
THAT TRADITION AND THE NORMS IS
THIS?
>> I THINK THAT'S PROBABLY THE
BIGGER STORY.
THIS EXECUTIVE ORDER WAS NOT
VETTED TO USE THE PRESIDENT'S
TERM ABOUT REFUGEES WITH
THE-- LEGAL COUNSEL IL, WAS NOT
WALKED PAST THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY OR THE STATE
DEPARTMENT TO ASK WHAT ARE THE
REPERCUSSIONS OF THIS GOING TO
BE.
IN ADDITION, IF THE PRESS
REPORTS ARE RIGHT, HOMELAND
SECURITY PUSHED BACK ON THE IDEA
THAT YOU WILL AFFECT PEOPLE WITH
GREEN CARDS.
THESE ARE LEGAL RESIDENTS OF
THE UNITED STATES AND THE WHITE
HOUSE SAID NOPE T APPLIES TO
THEM TOO.
BUT I THINK THE BROADER POINT IS
THIS IS TELLING US ONCE AGAIN
HOW THE TRUMP WHITE HOUSE
INTENDS TO GOVERN WHICH IS WHY I
THINK THE NEWS ABOUT THE
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
RESHUFFLING MAY BE A MUCH BIGGER
STORY ULTIMATELY THAN THE TRAVEL
BAN.
>> AND THEY DID WALK BACK THE
GREEN CARD THING EARLIER TODAY
ON THE SUNDAY MORNING TALK
SHOWS.
LET'S TALK ABOUT THAT SHUFFLE IN
THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL.
WHY IS THAT SO SIGNIFICANT?
>> WELL, THE CHAIR OF THE JOINT
CHIEFS OF STAFF, THE HIGHEST
RANKING MILITARY OFFICIAL IN THE
UNITED STATES IS NO LONGER
AUTOMATICALLY GUARANTEED A SEAT
AT THE TABLE FOR SO THE CALLED
PRINCIPLES MEETING, THAT IS WHEN
THE BIG SHOTS GATHER.
THAT'S UNPRECEDENTED.
EVEN MORE UNPRECEDENTED, STEVE
BANNON, THE PRESIDENT'S SENIOR
POLITICAL STRATEGIST WHO CAME
OVER FROM BREITBART NEWS TO THE
CAMPAIGN AND NOW THE WHITE
HOUSE, HE IS GOING TO BE
INCLUDED IN ALL OF THOSE
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
MEETINGS.
NOW I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANY
PRECEDENT FOR THAT.
GEORGE W. BUSH DID NOT SEND KARL
ROVE INTO THAT MEETING.
PRESIDENT OBAMA DID NOT SEND
DAVID AXELROD INTO THAT MEETING.
AND IT SEEMS TO SAY ONCE AGAIN,
THAT THIS WHITE HOUSE IS NOT
PLAYING BY THE TRADITIONAL RULES
OF THE GAME.
THAT THEY'RE PERFECTLY PREPARED
TO ANNOY OR EVEN CONCERN THE
ESTABLISHMENT.
DON'T LIS TONE WHAT THE
MAINSTREAM MEDIA IS GOING TO
TELL YOU ABOUT THIS.
WE ARE DOING WHAT WE SAID WE
WERE GOING TO DO AND THAT'S THE
MESSAGE WE WANT YOU TO TAKE FROM
THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF
GREENFIELD, THANK YOU FOR THAT
INSIGHT AND AS ALWAYS, JOINING
US FROM SANTA BARBARA TODAY.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, IN A
WRITTEN STATEMENT ISSUED LATE
THIS AFTERNOON, PRESIDENT TRUMP
DEFENDED HIS BAN ON SYRIAN
REFUGEES AND IMMIGRATION FROM
SEVEN MUSLIM-MAJORITY COUNTRIES,
SAYING IN PART:
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR-- ON
TUESDAY-- JUDY WOODRUFF SITS
DOWN FOR AN INTERVIEW WITH VICE
PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.